Mental Health
Services Guide
Wake County Residents

NAMI Wake Contact Information: Ann Akland
www.nami-wake.org

(919) 848-4490

Crisis Services and Psychiatric Hospitalization
Mobile Crisis Management Crisis Line: 877-

626-1772 – For crisis response 24 hours a day, 7 days
per week, 365 days a year. (Therapeutic Alternatives,
Inc.) – Will do a phone assessment and may come to
your home. You may have to wait several hours for
someone to come to your home. They will respond only if
the person with the illness talks to them directly.

UNC Wakebrook 107 Sunnybrook Rd., Raleigh,

NC 27610, (984) 974-4830. Crisis help is available for
emergency situations 24 hours a day for children and
adults by walking in or calling.

Holly Hill Hospital: HHH is committed to helping

you address your needs when outpatient levels of service
are no longer adequate to maintain your safety and your
ability to perform normal daily functions, or when you are
not certain and you need further assessment to ensure
safety or functionality. HHH recommends that you or
your psychiatrist call first to determine bed availability
(919 250-7000) for adults or 919 250-7600 for children &
adolescents, but you can also go directly to either of Holly
Hill Hospital’s locations for assessment. For adults, it
is located at the rear of the hospital, 3019 Falstaff Road,
Raleigh, NC 27610. For children and adolescents,
the location is 201 Michael J. Smith Lane, Raleigh, NC
27610. HHH is not authorized to bill for all types of
insurance. You are responsible for any charges your
insurance doesn’t cover, so you might want to authorize
someone to talk to business staff at HHH prior to your
admission to determine how much you will be charged.

Wakebrook is also the transfer point for law enforcement
to bring individuals who are in crisis. If after an
assessment, you are determined to need admission to
a psychiatric hospital, staff will locate a bed either on
site in the UNC Wakebrook Psychiatric Hospital or at a
different location. Because
of psychiatric hospital bed
shortages, you may have
Emergency: Call 911 & ask for
to wait several days. You
a Crisis Intervention Team (CIT)
might be transferred to
Officer, a law enforcement officer
Holly Hill Hospital or in
another hospital which may
who has received special training
be as close as Durham
in de-escalating crisis situations
or Chapel Hill or as far
involving people living with mental
away as Jacksonville or
Asheville.
illness and substance abuse

disorders.
There are recliners and
mats for people who are
waiting, but only 11 beds.
Transport to a psychiatric inpatient facility will likely be by
a security company, G4S, under contract with the Wake
County Sheriff’s Department. Patients should expect to
be restrained with velcro straps around their waists and
hands or with hand cuffs and shackles, depending upon
the situation.
Depending on the severity of condition, you may be
admitted to one of the 16 beds at Wakebrook licensed
for residential care, lower level of care than inpatient
hospitalization.

If you need substance abuse detoxification, you may be
admitted to one of the 16 residential beds fat Wakebrook.

Strategic Behavioral Center:

For admissions and information: 919800-4400 or 855-537-2262 (toll free),
www.strategicbh.com. Offers acute
psychiatric inpatient services for males
and females age 5 to 17. They also
offer psychiatric residential treatment for
children and youth.

Inpatient Psychiatric Care
for Geriatric Patients: UNC

Behavioral Health Services
Johnston Health, 509 N. Bright Leaf
Blvd. Smithfield, NC 27577, 919-938-7540 UNC Inpatient
Geriatric Unit , Have provder call for bed availability.)
Chapel Hill, NC; Novant Health Thomasville Medical
Center, 207 Old Lexington Road, Thomasville, North
Carolina 27360, Call for bed Availability -(336) 472-2000

Crisis Services and Psychiatric Hospitalization (continued from page 1)
Emergency Departments at Hospitals in Wake

County, e.g. WakeMed, WakeMed Cary, UNC Rex
Hospital, or Duke Raleigh. – None of these hospitals
has a mental health inpatient unit, but they will check
you for any medical problems and determine whether
or not you need to be involuntarily committed to a
psychiatric unit at another facility. (WakeMed does have
a special behavioral health team that works with patients
in the ED.) If you are determined to need involuntary
commitment to a psychiatric hospital, staff will locate
a bed either in Holly Hill Hospital, UNC Wakebrook, or
in another hospital which may be as close as Durham,
Chapel Hill or Rocky Mount or as far as Jacksonville or
Asheville. You can expect to wait in the ED for an average
of 2 to 3 days. If the ED staff determine that you need to
be admitted to a state psychiatric hospital such as Central

Page 2

Regional Hospital in Butner, you will wait an average
of about 4 days. Emergency Departments at UNC
Neuropsychiatric Hospital in Chapel Hill, Duke Hospital in
Durham, and Duke Regional Hospital in Durham. – (UNC
has a special section of its ED reserved for psychiatric
patients.) These hospitals have inpatient psychiatric units,
and they will check you for any medical problems and
determine whether or not you need to be admitted. If so,
you may be admitted to their psychiatric unit if a bed is
available. If not, staff will locate a bed in another hospital
which may be as close as Durham, Chapel Hill or Rocky
Mount or as far as Jacksonville or Asheville. You can
expect to wait in the ED for an average of 2 to 3 days.
Transport to and from the psychiatric inpatient facility will
likely be by law enforcement or contractor transport staff.

What to expect from Inpatient Psychiatric Hospitalization:
Most inpatient stays are very short, 7 days or less. They are primarily intended to provide safety and stabilization
through medication management and a safe and therapeutic environment. It is important to have good outpatient
mental health services, i.e. psychiatrist, therapist, psychosocial, etc., in place to avoid hospitalization and to maintain
as much stability as possible. If you are particularly psychotic or aggressive, you may not be appropriate for admission
to a regular inpatient psychiatric unit. In that case, you may be admitted to a state psychiatric hospital bed. There
are a very limited number of state hospital psychiatric beds so patients may wait for a week or more. For the Wake
County area, most patients are admitted to Central Regional Hospital in Butner. On average, stays at state hospitals
are not very long—usually one to two weeks but can be as long as several months when needed. Social workers at
the hospitals are responsible for providing discharge planning which connects patients to outpatient resources in the
community.

Insurance Coverage for Mental Illness
Coverage varies according to your policy and
network of providers. You need to shop around for
insurance that has a good network for mental health.
Private insurance and Medicare will generally pay
for inpatient hospitalization and a portion of the cost
for medication management and a certain number
of therapy sessions if you and your provider meet
all the requirements of the plan. Most other types
of treatment such as those listed on page 3 are not
covered. You usually will not be eligible for payment
for these services from public funds if you have
private insurance regardless of the fact that your
insurance will not pay for it. However, you may want
to contact Alliance Behavioral Health for a specific
determination. (See next page for contact no.)
Our recommendation is to first consult your
insurance carrier’s network of providers and then to

talk to others who are privately insured to get their
views and recommendations for providers. You can
network with others in NAMI support groups and
education meetings.
Many psychiatrists are not on insurance panels
and require that you pay them upfront. If you have
insurance, they may accept claims from “out of
network” providers.
If you are disabled by your mental illness, Medicaid
coverage may improve your chances of receiving
the care you need through enhanced services.
Contact Wake County Human Services at this
number 919-212-7000 and ask for assistance with
Medicaid enrollment. Alternatively, appear in person
at 220 Swinburne St., Raleigh, NC 27610

How to Find Mental Health Services in Wake County

Page 3

If you are Insured by MEDICAID or have NO INSURANCE Coverage
Call 24 hour toll-free Alliance Access and Information Line at (800) 510-9132.
Alliance Behavioral Healthcare (ABH):

Alliance Behavioral Healthcare is a “managed care
organization, i.e. MCO that manages the “public” mental
health, intellectual/ developmental disability and substance
abuse services for the citizens of Durham, Wake,
Cumberland and Johnston counties. Although they do
not actually provide services, their job is to manage the
public funds from each County, the state, Medicaid, and
other federal funds to ensure that individuals who seek help
receive the quality services and supports they are eligible for
to help them achieve their goals and live as independently
as possible. These services are delivered by a network of
private providers who contract with Alliance.

You are eligible for services through ABH if you are insured by
Medicaid and live in one of these counties or if you are uninsured
and assessed to meet eligibility criteria. When you need
assistance, you can find out if you are eligible by calling the 24
hour Alliance Access and Information line (see above). You may
learn more about how to access public services through ABH
by going to this website: http://www.alliancebhc.org/accessingservices.
Depending upon the assessment, these are some services that
are available through a network of mental health providers under
the Alliance Health Plan:
•
Assertive Community Treatment Team (ACTT)–
comprehensive, personalized treatment program for people
who have been diagnosed with a severe and persistent
mental illness. ACTT staff work with people in their home, at
school, or at work, and are available 24/7 with rapid response
to calls. ACTT employs an integrated team approach to help
individuals with everyday basics such as getting moving in
the morning, taking medications, and making it through the
day. Team members closely monitor progress to ensure that
medication is working and being administered correctly. They
also help people find proper housing, sort out expenses,
and build skills for the home, community and workplace. The
team includes a psychiatrist, nurses, vocational specialists,
therapists, and other mental health professionals as well as
peer support staff. The main goal of this intensive service
is to help people remain out of the hospital and living in the
community.
•
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) – A form of
psychotherapy that emphasizes the important role of thinking
in how we feel and what we do.
•
Community Support – The process of working with adults or
children and their families to develop a plan and to coordinate
services and supports to help them to reach their life goal.
•
Crisis Assessment and Stabilization and Crisis Residential
– Offered at the UNC Wakebrook Crisis and Assessment
Services, an alternative to a hospital where individuals in
crisis can go to receive help; the goal is for individuals to
return home as quickly as possible
•
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT) a specific type of
cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy developed in the late
1980s by psychologist Marsha M. Linehan to help better treat
borderline personality disorder. Since its development, it has
also been used for the treatment of other kinds of mental
health disorders and substance use disorders.
•
Evaluation and Testing – Collecting of information about an
adult’s or a child’s and family’s life, strengths, needs and

abilities in order to better develop a plan of services and
supports
•
Housing and Residential Services – Once you are receiving
services, your provider can help you decide which residential
supports you will need to achieve your goals; this can include
various kinds of assistance, like rent subsidies and help with
start-up expenses, to help ensure safe, stable housing
•
Integrated Dual-Diagnosis Treatment – Improves the
quality of life for persons with dual disorders by integrating
substance abuse services with mental health services,
combining medicines with psychological, educational and
social interventions to address the needs of consumers and
their families
•
Intensive In-Home Services – A team and family approach
to provide intensive services for children who have serious
emotional disturbances, complex family challenges or serious
behavioral problems likely to result in out-of-home placement
•
Medication Management – Evaluation of medication options
by an approved provider to determine which medicine is best,
how it should be taken and whether it is working
•
Multi-Systemic Therapy – A team and family-based
intervention designed to enhance the skills of youth and their
families who have anti-social, aggressive/violent behaviors or
delinquency issues, including involvement with the juvenile
justice system
•
Outpatient Therapy (individual, family, group) – Professionals
teach new skills or ways to cope with problems
•
Drop-in Center – A place where individuals with mental illness
can go to relax, participate in meaningful activity and socialize
in a safe environment
•
Psychosocial Rehabilitation (club house) – A program for
adults with mental illness and substance use issues to
receive support, learn new skills and be encouraged to reach
their goals
•
Rapid Response Homes – A safe and therapeutic short-term
residential option for children dealing with serious behavioral
or emotional disturbances or family crises
•
Respite Care –Care for an individual with a disability in the
home or other safe place so the family or loved ones can take
a “break” from their care giving responsibilities (only for I/DD)
•
Substance Abuse Detoxification – A monitored process
involving abstinence to clear the drug from the body,
accompanied by support during the physical and
psychological changes that result
•
Substance Abuse Intensive Outpatient Treatment – A
program that provides the patient multiple sessions per week
to learn new behaviors, to participate in self-help groups and
to practice relapse prevention strategies
•
Substance Abuse Residential Services – Provide structured,
communal living (such as halfway houses) serving as stepdown or transition from more restrictive environments
•
Supported Employment – Helps people with disabilities
participate in the labor market in jobs they prefer with the
level of professional help they need.
If you would like to view providers in the ABH network for these
services, you will find a searchable database on this website:
http://providersearch.alliancebhc.org/default.aspx.

Other Mental Health Services 						

Page 4

Open Access - Walk-In Clinics
If you are a Wake County resident in need of mental health
services, you may receive an assessment by walking into the
UNC Wakebrook Crisis and Assessment Center or into one of
Monarch’s walk-in mental health clinics (see below). These and
other approved assessment sites or independent practitioners

are able to provide a comprehensive assessment and, in
some cases, provide follow-up care to individuals covered
by the Alliance Health Plan or, in some cases, by other types
of insurance. Call the 24 hour toll-free Alliance Access and
Information Line at (800) 510-9132 to learn about other options.

Raleigh, N.C.
1001 Navaho Drive, Suite 100
(919) 856-4703
Fax: (919) 856-3795
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.- 5p.m.
Extended hours are offered on Mondays and Thursdays in the Raleigh
office until 7 p.m. Individuals who are emergent and walk in after 5
p.m. will be served; however, routine needs may be scheduled for the
following morning.

Friday 8 a.m.-3 p.m.
Fuquay-Varina, N.C
30 N. Judd Pkwy. NE
(919) 567-0558
Fax: (919) 552-4283
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.- 5 p.m.

Cary, N.C.
300 Asheville Avenue, Ste. 200
Cary, N.C. 27518
(919) 650-3325
Fax: (919) 651-8091
Open Access – Walk-In:
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday 8 a.m.-3 p.m.; Tuesday 8 a.m.-4 p.m.;
Friday 8 a.m.-1 p.m.

Wake Forest, N.C.
350 E. Holding Ave.
(919) 263-9365
Fax: (919) 435-1035
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.
Zebulon, N.C.
1002 Dogwood Dr.
(919) 375-4453
Fax: (919) 375-4648
Hours of Operation: Monday-Friday, 8 a.m.-5 p.m.

Hours of Operation:
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday 8 a.m.-5 p.m.; Tuesday 8 a.m.-7 p.m.;

Monarch - Club Horizon
A Clubhouse is a model of rehabilitation (PSR) which promotes
recovery, full community integration, and improved quality of life
for persons who have mental health conditions that seriously impair
functioning. Clubhouse services directly address the high risks that
persons with serious mental illness experience with regard to frequent
hospitalizations, low levels of functioning in the community, social
isolation, persistent homelessness, inappropriate incarceration, and
unemployment.
The program operates during regular business hours, promoting
mutual acceptance, respect, and support. Persons with severe and
persistent mental illness work at their own pace to gain or regain the
confidence and skills necessary to lead vocationally productive and
socially satisfying lives. Centering on the concept of a “work-ordered

day,” each “member” chooses to participate in one of several work units
to accomplish the daily functions of the Clubhouse.
The Clubhouse also provides independent housing support, assistance
in attaining educational goals, and help with other life needs such
as food, clothing, transportation, physical wellness, and entitlement
benefits, and employment. (Call 919 266 2202)
Clubhouse programs are known to prevent repeated hospitalizations
for people who need coordinated, and often, elevated supports in order
to function well in the community. As an example, national statistics
show that re-hospitalization rates for clubhouse members is 14%,
compared with 44% for those not in a clubhouse setting. Club Horizon
has maintained member re-hospitalization rates of less than 10% since
provision of Clubhouse services began in 2004.

Other Mental Health Services 						

Page 5

Caramore Community - Carboro, NC
Caramore Community is a structured support program for adults with mental illness. The program exists for the
purposes of promoting wellness, managing illness, and facilitating the skills needed to live and work in the community.
Caramore offers a complete package to empower adults with mental illness attain their own meaningful and successful
independence. Here’s how --• Work - Participants immediately start receiving paid work that helps them develop the jobs skills necessary to
receiving and maintaining community employment. Once ready, job support staff works with them to develop/enhance
their resume, fill out applications, and interview effectively. Most importantly, staff will get participants a community job.
The job is not complete once participants are hired...staff continue to help them navigate the challenges of community
employment, and offer support until no longer warranted.
• Independence - The participants that are receiving residential services, move into a supervised apartment that allows
them the opportunity to live in a de-stigmatized, integrative environment. While residing in a Caramore apartment,
participants will save money, buy groceries, monitor medications, maintain the cleanliness of their home, and develop or
revisit those daily skills necessary to living independently. With the help of Caramore’s budgeting and finance counseling,
participants will eventually move out into their own living situation with greater experience in dealing with the affairs of
residential responsibility.
• Structure - Early on in the program, Caramore participants have a very structured day, which entails working Monday
- Friday from 8:15am to 3:15pm. clients receive transportation to the grocery store, to mental health and physical
appointments, and in some cases to their community job when they gain competitive employment. Staff conduct daily
room inspections, hold clients’ medications, keep up with their appointments, offer cooking and computer classes,
provide nutritional counsel, and assist with the overall coordination of their care. As participants move through the
program, the structure relaxes so as to give them more responsibility, ownership, and empowerment.
• Engagement - Every Caramore participant is different, and every Caramore participant requires different attention.
Soon after admission, Caramore participants establish vocational and residential goals to improve upon. Instead of
relying on participants to work through their challenges on their own, staff actively engage them with their goals, and
work to help them realize their potential. We are a mirror of accountability meant to help our participants learn to weather
the practical challenges of life.
Caramore exists to help the people living with mental illness focus on real-life challenges that demand a practical,
structured approach, so that independence is no longer just an abstract concept, but an attainable reality. Caramore has
been helping people become WISE for over 35 years. Phone (919) 967-3402

UNC Schizophrenia Treatment and Evaluation Program (STEP) Clinic Wake
UNC STEP (Schizophrenia Treatment and Evaluation
Program) Community Clinic is an outpatient clinic
located at 3010 Falstaff Road in Raleigh, N.C. that
helps individuals and families dealing with serious
mental illness to make strides toward health and
recovery. They also have regional clinics on a limitedtime basis in Wake Forest, Zebulon and Fuquay
Varina.

We provide illness education and medication
management, and help our clients come up with
personal coping and relapse prevention strategies.
Phone for all Wake STEP Clinic Offices: 919.445.0350

Wake STEP Clinic was created for approximately
500 Wake County individuals with severe behavioral
needs who were transferred from the Wake County
Human Services Department to UNC Healthcare July
1, 2013.

Regional Offices
Southern Regional Center - Fuquay Varina.
130 Judd Parkway NE, 1:00-5:00 p. m.
Every Monday

The team of mental health professionals and
graduate students from UNC-Chapel Hill―
psychiatrists, psychiatry residents, clinical social
workers, peer specialists, nurses, and others―
specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder other serious mental
illnesses. Using research-based, best-practice clinical
skills, we assist our patients with their recovery.

UNC STEP Community Clinic, Wake County
3010 Falstaff Road Raleigh, 8:00 a.m.- 5:00 p.m.
Monday-Friday

Northern Regional Center - Wake Forest
350 East Holding Ave.
1:00 p.m. – 5:00 p.m.
2nd and 4th Thursday of each month
Eastern Regional Center - Zebulon
1002 Dogwood Dr.
Tuesday 8:30 a.m. – 12:00 p.m

Other Mental Health Services 						

Page 6

UNC CECMH - Wake ACT (Assertive Community Treatment) Team
UNC’s ACT Teams are well-known for their success in providing transition support for individuals with severe mental illness as they
move from a facility to living in the community. With expansion of UNC clinics to Wake County, a relatively new Wake ACT Team now
serves patients in Wake County.
This evidenced-based practice model provides an individual with a comprehensive team of mental health professionals and
paraprofessionals who have a common goal of assisting these clients /patients in receiving medication and other care that will allow
them to live a meaningful life, preferably in an independent living situation. It serves individuals in various settings, including home,
work and community.
The team is comprised of a team leader, mental health professionals, nursing staff, a team psychiatrist, housing specialist, vocational
specialist, substance abuse specialist and a peer support specialist. Individuals are seen an average of 12 times per month for
medication monitoring, symptom monitoring, therapeutic interventions and care coordination activities. The team is available to
patients 24/7, 365 days/yr.
Individuals who meet criteria for this service typically have an Axis 1 diagnosis of schizophrenia or other psychotic disorder or bi-polar
disorder. In addition, the person will likely have a recent history of multiple hospitalizations, be at risk for homelessness, or have
difficulty engaging in “traditional office based” services.
Contact: 919.445.0296

UNC Oasis - Outreach & Support Intervention Services
for Early Psychosis
A safe place to reclaim your life.
OASIS - Outreach and Support Intervention Services
One in fifty people develop a psychotic disorder. The OASIS
Program is a safe place to reclaim your life.
The OASIS Program is a clinical program of the UNC Center for
Excellence in Community Mental Health within the Department
of Psychiatry at UNC’s School of Medicine. Their mission
is to promote full recovery from a first episode of psychosis
using proven and innovative approaches to comprehensive
and coordinated specialty care and integrative medicine. Our
team of psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers from
UNC-Chapel Hill specialize in treating early psychosis. Using
research-based, best-practice clinical skills, we provide:
Psychiatric and psychosocial assessments
Medication management
Therapy and support for individuals, families, and groups
Assertive outreach and crisis services
Recreational activities
They believe the future continues to be bright for our young
people. That’s why we also support clients at work, school, and

in relationships; work with their family and friends; and promote
recovery and relapse-prevention.
Individuals who are experiencing or recovering from a first
episode of psychosis within the past 3 years; persons ages 1536; clients who live within a 90 minute drive of one of our two
clinics, in Chapel Hill and Raleigh.
Consultation services are available for those outside of our
catchment zone.
For more information or to make a referral, call OASIS at
919.962-1401
or go to this website:
http://www.med.unc.edu/psych/cecmh/oasis/referrals

