Housing Guide for Individuals
Living with Mental Illness
A starting point to help you explore options.

By Chris Tepedino 2/09/2015
Updated 04/22/2019 by Ann Akland

i

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction………………………………………………………………………………………………..………………………………..….…1
Who to Contact When Experiencing a Housing Crisis or Homelessness…………………………………………….…1
• Coordinated Entry
• Homeless Shelters and Services
• Alliance Healthcare Programs
Wake County Government & Housing ……………………………………………………………………………………..………….3
Housing and Urban Development……………………………………………………………………………………….……………….4
• Section 8 Vouchers
• Affordable Housing
CASA Housing ……………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….5
• Supported
• Workforce
Resources for Human Development……………………………………………………………………………………………………….5
• Supported and Supervised
Supervised Living Group Homes…………………………………………………..……………………………………………………….7
Transitions to Community Living…………… ………………………………………………………………….……………….………..8
Adult Care/Family Care Homes………………………………………………………………………………………………………..……8
Other Options
Caramore Community………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………9
Oxford Houses (Substance Use Disorder)………………………………………………………………………… …………..10

iii

iv

INTRODUCTION

A challenging aspect of living with mental
illness is securing housing that is affordable and
provides a level of supportive care. The need
for housing for those living with mental illness
can seem like a daunting prospect. Many of
those living with mental illness face challenges
of job security, general stability, and healthrelated concerns.

Even when options are available, it is difficult to
know how to walk through the process of obtaining
that housing.
That is the purpose of this guide. After reading
this, you will know what different kinds of housing
assistance and affordable housing are available for
those living with mental illness, how to start the
application process for obtaining your desired
housing, and who to contact if you have any further
questions.
There are two ways of reading this guide
effectively. If you know what kind of housing you’re
looking for, flip to the section of that type of
housing as referenced in the Table of Contents. If
you’re completely new to finding housing for those
living with mental illness, start at the top and read
all the way through.
Each topic has a unique role in the attempt to
find housing for those living with mental illness. A
range of housing options will be covered, as well as
who provides that housing and what you need to do
to secure it.
It is the hope that this guide demystifies the
process of securing affordable housing and enables
more people living with mental illness and their
families to discover new avenues of stability and
support.

1

Who to Contact When Experiencing a
Housing Crisis or Homelessness
Coordinated Entry is a project of the Wake
County Coalition to End Homelessness. Their
website contains a list of organizations across Wake
County that will advise individuals and families
about community resources.
https://endhomelessnesswake.org/continuum-ofcare/coordinated-entry/

Alliance Healthcare may also be
able to help with short term assistance.
They have two programs:
• The Independent Living Initiative Program (ILI) is

•

a short-term, one-time assistance program for
children and adults receiving enhanced benefit
services through Alliance Behavioral
Healthcare. An applicant is defined as the
person who is applying for ILI funding for
him/herself OR the parent or legal guardian of a
child, youth or adult consumer with diminished
capacity. The intent of the ILI Housing Program
is to assist applicants who are behind on their
rent, homeless, facing possible eviction or utility
disconnection or are in need of start-up funds
for newly acquired housing (i.e. security
deposit). In order to submit an ILI application
for financial assistance, the individuals’ mental
health providers must register and attend a
training session to gain access to Alliance’s
online portal. Alliance no longer accepts hard
copy applications.
Alliance has also implemented a component of
the ILI Housing Program called the Restoring
Hope Initiative. The Restoring Hope Initiative is
a 3-6 month longer rental assistance program
targeting frequent utilizers who are homeless or
precariously housed. Frequent utilizers tend to
be an individual who frequents emergency
rooms, the criminal justice system and shelters.
Continued assistance is contingent upon the
applicant’s monthly progress toward selfsufficiency (i.e., employment
search,enrollment in educational/job training
program, etc.). For more information about
Restoring Hope, please contact your county ILI

Housing Coordinator. Alliance Behavioral
Healthcare website:
http://www.alliancebhc.org/
Contact: Alliance Behavioral Healthcare
Information Center: 1-800-510-9132

Homeless Shelters in Wake County
Family Promise of Wake County provides churchbased emergency shelter and meals to Wake
County families experiencing temporary
homelessness. They also provide life-skills
training, case management provided by social
workers, a day center and transitional housing. They
are one of only two emergency shelters in Wake
County to allow families to stay together, regardless
of the ages and genders of the children and parents,
sparing parents the difficult choice between
keeping their families together and finding a safe
place for their children to sleep. They are the only
homelessness nonprofit to offer a continuum of
services and partnerships to move families all the
way from homelessness to safe, affordable,
permanent housing.
(919) 832-6024
903 Method Rd, Raleigh, NC 27606
South Wilmington Street Center Operated by
Wake County, the homeless men’s center provides
emergency shelter, community outreach and the
Progressive Housing Program which provides: Case
Management, Job Skills and Job Search Training,
Housing Counseling, and Transitional Housing.
Contact: Frank Lawrence, Supervisor
(919) 857-9428
The Raleigh Rescue Mission assists those who are
ready to make a commitment to transforming their
life, and working to overcome the negative factors
that led to homelessness. Most clients who commit
to their programs end up spending an average of
one year in the program. The shelter serves
women with children, women, and men.
919.828.9014
314 E. Hargett Street
Raleigh, North Carolina 27601

2

Helen Wright Center The Helen Wright Center for
Women is a program for single, homeless women
without children in their care. They designate 24
beds for emergency shelter. Women are offered an
initial fourteen night stay and may request
additional time if they wish to enter a program bed.
The Helen Wright Center for Women’s program
provides more than housing assistance. With a
focus on the establishment of well-defined goals
and objectives, women are offered an opportunity
to break the cycle of homelessness and achieve selfsufficiency through intensive case management
services. The basic components of case
management include intake, assessment of needs,
service planning, linkage to services, continuous
monitoring, and client advocacy. In addition to
increasing access to medical and psychosocial
services, case management can also include crisis
intervention, discharge planning and direct services
such as emotional support, client education, and
skill building.
401 W Cabarrus St, Raleigh, NC 27601
919-833-1748 after 1:00pm.

Wrenn House Wrenn House provides a
safe, legal, and responsible environment for youth
who run away from home, who are homeless, or
are otherwise in a crisis situation. They are open 24
hours a day, 365 days a year. Wrenn House is
available to any youth age 10 – 17, with priority
given to youth from Wake County and Raleigh.
Contact: 919-833-3312 (phone)
https://www.havenhousenc.org/programs/crisishomeless-programs/wrenn-house/LATEST WORKS
Salvation Army - The Barbara L. Goodmon Family
Emergency Shelter at the Judy D. Zelnak Center of
Hope assists homeless families and those
fleeing domestic violence. In addition to providing
basic necessities, they offer individual
case management, parenting workshops and
tutoring opportunities for children. They are located
at 1863 Capital Blvd in Raleigh. For more

information, call at 919.834.6733 and ask to
speak with someone in the Social Ministries
Department, or email at info@wakearmy.org.

https://www.salvationarmycarolinas.org/wakecoun
ty/programs/social-ministries/women-andchildrens-shelter/get-shelter
Cornerstone Facility – Operated by Wake County,
this program provides intensive community based
services with a behavioral health focus, as well as a
day shelter for persons who are homeless. Services
provided are: Case Management, Counseling
Services, Employment Services, Mental Health
Assessments, and Medication Management
220 Snow Ave. (Corner of W. Hargett Street & Snow
Avenue), Raleigh, NC 27603
Contac: 919-508-0777
The Women’s Center is the only day shelter
focused exclusively on serving and empowering
women experiencing homelessness in The Triangle
area of North Carolina. Through tireless
engagement and outreach, they work with each
individual woman to help break the cycle of
homelessness and realize her dream of a safe,
affordable home and sustained self-sufficiency.
112 Cox Ave.
Raleigh, NC 27605
919-829-3711

•

•

•

3

1.Chronic homelessness with a
behavioral health diagnosis
2.HIV/AIDS
3.Youth aging out of Foster Care
4.Veterans
Ready to Rent
Workshop series for individuals on how to
be a successful renter, restore credit,
maintain a home and manage finances.
Individuals receive a certificate and referral
to a landlord upon completion

•

Daily Housing Information Sessions
Assist individuals and families at Human
Services Center (Swinburne) by providing
resources and information on agencies
which provide assistance with credit
counseling, subsidized housing, vouchers
and/or other information which may be
helpful to overcome barriers

•

Supportive Housing
Provides case management services at two
affordable housing complexes (Lennox
Chase https://dhic.org/wpcontent/uploads/2014/09/lennox_procedur
es.pdf & Brookridge https://dhic.org/wpcontent/uploads/2014/09/brookridge_app_
procedures_revised.pdf – owned by DHIC)
that serve chronically homeless individuals
and those needing additional support to
maintain stable housing

•

Community Outreach Team & McKinney
Team
Identifies and engages persons who have a
behavioral health diagnosis and are

WAKE COUNTY GOVERNMENT

The government of Wake County plays a role in
finding housing for those experiencing homelessness
or a housing crisis as well as looking to the future to
develop housing to meet the needs of Wake County
citizens.
It has a specific department called
Wake County Department of Housing Affordability &
Community Revitalization which offers these
programs.
• Elderly & Disabled Housing Rehabilitation
Program (50% Area Median Income (AMI)
and below) Improves the health and safety
of homes for elderly (62 & older) or
disabled homeowners
• Emergency Rehabilitation Program (50%
Average Median Income and below)
Responds to immediate Health and safety
risks of very low-income renters or
homeowners

Affordable Housing Development
Funding to subsidize affordable housing
developments for low-income individuals,
families or seniors. Starting in 2019 require
10% of units be set aside for participants of
the Rental Assistance Housing Program
(RAHP)
Rental Assistance Housing Program
(Formerly called Shelter Plus Care)
Provides rental subsidies and case
management services for individuals
experiencing:

experiencing homelessness to assist in
accessing and maintaining safe and stable
housing
Contact:
Alicia Arnold, Wake County Government,
Department of Housing Affordability & Community
Revitalization, Alicia.Arnold@wakegov.com

HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

Founded in 1965 as a Cabinet department in the
Executive branch of the United States federal
government, the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) has the mission of creating
quality, affordable housing for all citizens of the
United States. With topics areas of HUD ranging
from economic development to helping people buy
a house, the department institutes policies to find
housing for the homeless and secure housing for
the disabled or those with low-income. The HUD
field office in North Carolina is located in
Greensboro, which is a little more than an hour
away from the heart of Wake County. They can be
reached by phone via a toll free number and by
email as well.
HUD plays a role in two important aspects of
housing for those living with mental illness: Section
8 housing and Affordable Housing.
Public Housing is rental property that is owned,
managed, and leased by a housing authority. The
Raleigh Housing Authority owns and manages
apartments in several public housing communities
which are leased to low-income people at an
income-based rental rate in the Raleigh area only.
https://www.rhaonline.com/public-housing/
HCVP/Section 8 rental vouchers are for very low
income individuals and the usual waiting time is 4 to
7 years. These properties are owned and
managed by private landlords who opt to lease the
unit to a HCVP/Section 8 program participant. These
landlords typically advertise their property in the
local newspaper and/or on housing websites. The
housing authority/housing agency subsidizes a
portion of the tenant’s rent to the landlord based
on the tenant’s income. RHA administers

4

HCVP/Section 8 rental assistance in the Wake
County area only.
https://www.rhaonline.com/section-8-housingchoice-voucher/

AFFORDABLE HOUSING

Affordable Housing is for those under the median
household income of a community. HUD
contributes to but does not manage this program.
Instead, developers of apartments can receive tax
subsidies for reserving some of their dwelling
units for those who make less than the median
household income level for the community.
Median household income is defined as the
middle of all income levels of a designated area.
That means 50 percent of people make more
than that number, and 50 percent of people
make less than that number.
The North Carolina Housing Coalition has an
“Affordable Housing Primer,” which covers topics
ranging from ‘What is Affordable Housing’ to ‘Fair
Housing Basics.’ Their website is
www.nchousing.org.
To search for Affordable Housing go to the
website www.publichousing.com and search
North Carolina. There you will see apartment
complexes that give lower rates that are based on
income level. The site further shows which
listings are Section 8, Affordable Housing,
through nonprofit organizations, and other
categories.

YOUR NEXT STEPS

Deciding between Section 8 Housing,
Affordable Housing, and any of the other choices
presented in this guide is a difficult endeavor.
Each type of housing has its pros and cons, and
there is no one-size-fits-all when it comes to
finding the right housing option. When in doubt,
talk to someone to find out which options will
suit your particular situation the best. A key
consideration is period of waiting time until the
voucher or housing is likely to be available, so be
sure to ask. Picking up the phone and emailing

are two crucial components in your efforts to
select the right housing option for you.
In this guide, we will continue to list phone
numbers and contact information for numerous
organizations, which you will be able to use when
selecting a housing option.

RESOURCES

HUD: http://portal.hud.gov/
HUD-NC: http://portal.hud.gov/  Search NC
HUD-NC Phone Number: (336) 547-4000
Raleigh Housing Authority: www.rhaonline.com
North Carolina Housing Coalition:
www.nchousing.org
Affordable Housing Search Engines:
http://www.nchousingsearch.org/
www.publichousing.com
Housing Authority of the County of Wake (Burnetta
Smith- Exec.Director.....919-269-6404)

http://www.hacwnc.org/Home.aspx

NORTH CAROLINA HOUSING FINANCE
AGENCY

If you are seeking affordable housing that offers
accessibility options or supportive services, the
North Carolina Housing Finance Agency may be able
to help. Many of the affordable apartments are
offered through local service providers for persons
with disabilities, including physical, mental and
developmental disabilities. These apartments are
affordable for households with lower incomes. They
are owned and operated by private owners, local
governments, and nonprofit organizations. Some
apartments include rent assistance to make them
affordable to persons living on Supplemental
Security Income (SSI). You will find a statewide
listing a NCHousingSearch.org, or by contacting
your service provider.

TARGETING PROGRAM
Over 1,000 low-income persons with disabilities
have successfully obtained housing through the
Targeting Program – a partnership between the NC
Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS)

5

and the NC Housing Finance Agency (NCHFA).
Another 700 units are under development. Benefits
of Targeting Program housing include: ° Access to
newly constructed or rehabbed independent
apartments. ° Integration in communities of choice.
° Rent that does not exceed 30% of household
income. ° Required access to supports and services
by Referral Agency.
The Targeting Program provides housing linked to
supports and services by virtue of commitment
from referral agencies. DHHS and NCHFA look to
local mental health providers to make referrals for
persons receiving their services and to provide
access to supportive services for Targeted Unit
tenants. Basic responsibilities of referral agencies
include: 1) Making referrals based on professional
assessment of each individual’s ability to live in
independent housing with the supports and services
available. 2) Providing access to supportive services
for persons referred to Targeted units and being a
point of contact should tenants need assistance. 3)
Collaborating with other community partners to
support tenants and build local housing knowledge.
Targeting Housing Program (DHHS- Stephanie
Williams.....919-855-4992)

CASA
CASA is a nonprofit affordable housing developer
and property manager, operating in Wake County
since 1992. CASA provides permanent supportive
housing for people living with disabilities and
workforce housing for low income households.
CASA was originally founded to meet the housing
needs of people living with mental illness in Raleigh.
Since then, the agency has expanded to serve
people with any kind of disability in Wake, Durham,
and Orange counties. CASA owns and manages
nearly 500 affordable apartments across the
Triangle.
CASA receives funding from numerous sources,
including federal and local government entities,
rent and housing vouchers, and community
support.

Permanent Supportive Housing:

In 2019, CASA’s has 246 permanent
supportive housing apartments in Wake County.
They have 2,500 people in their applicant pool
waiting for an apartment. These units are
reserved for households in which at least one
member is living with a disability. CASA follows a
Housing First philosophy and does not qualify
individuals based on their treatment history or
engagement. CASA does encourage, but does not
require, tenants to partner with supportive services
to help them live independently.
To qualify for supportive housing,
applicants must provide proof of disability from a
licensed health professional and financial need.
Many CASA properties give priority to households
who are experiencing homelessness and individuals
who have a housing voucher.
To apply, applicants must first complete
Part 1 of CASA’s Supportive Housing Application.
Qualified applicants are then placed in CASA’s
Applicant Pool and will be contacted when a
vacancy matches the applicant’s qualifications. To
learn more or to download Part 1 of CASA’s
Supportive Housing Application, visit the website:
https://www.casanc.org/live-with-casa/

Workforce Housing:

Thirty percent of
CASA’s apartments are workforce housing units.
In 2019, they have 56 workforce apartments.
Applicants qualify if they fall within the published
income range for a vacant unit. Vacancies are
posted on CASA’s website, and applications are
processed on a first come, first serve basis. You
can also sign up to receive an email when a
workforce housing unit becomes available. Learn
more: https://www.casanc.org/live-with-casa/

RESOURCES

CASA Website: http://www.casanc.org/
CASA Housing Information:
https://www.casanc.org/live-with-casa/
CASA Phone #: (919) 754-9960
CASA Email: casahousing@casanc.org

6

RESOURCES FOR HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT –(RHD)

RHD NC provides residential supports and
services for adults with diagnosis of intellectual and
developmental disabilities, serious and persistent
mental illness and adults with dual diagnosis of
mental illness and developmental disabilities.
Individuals live in a variety of settings including
Individual apartments, shared apartments and
licensed group homes. Supervision in each setting is
provided according to the level of need from 24
hours a day to 14 hours per day. RHD NC is
committed to providing the best care and support
for all persons served based on their individual
desires and level of need. RHD programs have a
focuses on a person-centered approach, and much
care is given to working with individuals to create
homes and live the highest quality of life possible.

RHD has 16 apartments in west Raleigh where
two staff are available for support 14 hours per
day. They also operate 12 apartments with
staff onsite 24 hours per day..
919-755-1335
Manay.Gunter@rhd.org

DHHS LICENSED CONGREGATE LIVING
FACILITIES

Housing options are based not only on
income, but also on levels of care. That’s where
the DHHS Licensed Facilities come in. DHHS
stands for the Department of Health and Human
Services. In this section, we’re specifically talking
about the North Carolina Department of Health
and Human Services.
While DHHS is the larger department, it
encompasses the Division of Health Service
Regulation, which encompasses the Mental
Health Licensure and Certification Section.
That is where we’ll start.
The Mental Health Licensure and Certification
section licenses certain facilities in Wake County
(and other counties) to serve as supervised living
homes for those who live with mental illness. The
facilities include intermediate care facilities, day
services, and group homes. For our purposes,

we’ll be discussing group homes.
Group homes provide a 24-hour living
environment in a non-hospital setting, where
room, board, and supervision are an integral part
of the care and treatment provided to an
individual. This definition is according to the rules
and regulations section on the DHHS website,
which we will list later for reference.
For the purposes of the licensing, there are
four broad classifications when dealing with these
facilities: (1) Mental Health; (2) Developmental
Disabilities; (3) Substance Use Disorder; and (4)
Services For More Than One Disability.
We’ll just be looking into the mental health
category and the substance Use category.
As a general rule, group homes of any kind
have fewer than 7 individuals living in the home..
Surveys of homes are conducted once per
year to determine the quality of the living
environment. If a complaint is made, then the
group home is surveyed sooner. Group homes
vary in terms of quality of the environment, of
the staff, and of the overall living conditions.
The primary method for securing a spot in
one of these homes is to shop around, just as if
you’re looking for an apartment to rent. Here are
a few types of group homes that have been
established.

SUPERVISED LIVING

Supervised living homes are “a 24-hour
facility which provides residential services to
individuals in a home environment where the
primary purpose of these services is the care,
habilitation or rehabilitation of individuals who
have a mental illness, a developmental disability
or disabilities, or a substance abuse disorder, and
who require supervision when in the residence.”
There are many important words there.
Clients live in a home environment, receiving
services for habilitation or rehabilitation, and
must have a mental illness or substance abuse
disorder, among other possibilities. There are also
clues in the rules and regulations section as to
what services the client receives before and

7

during their stay.
For habilitation, clients undergo an entry
assessment, where the client’s needs and
strengths are assessed, as well as the client’s
presenting problem. A plan is then formed and
documented, along with progress toward the
goals outlined in the plan.
There are also rules and regulations
governing the storage and dispensing of the
medication of the client. Disposal of medication
(if needed) and education about medication also
follow a strict set of rules. For most everything
with these facilities, there is a rule or regulation
defining it. And there are repercussions for
breaking them.

ALTERNATIVE FAMILY LIVING

While group homes have two or more clients
living in them, an individual may want to choose a
more family-oriented environment. That’s where
alternative family living comes in.
A local nonprofit gives a good description of
alternative family living: “An individual lives with
a family in a private residence, with or without
other people with disabilities, and the family
serves as the natural support system, meeting
any needs that may arise.”
It is, essentially, all about living with a family.
This does not necessarily mean a person is not
“supervised” or even disqualified from the
“supervised living” category. The two often go
hand in hand. The difference here is that a larger
family unit is present, rather than just the owner
of an establishment and staff. It’s a good option
for those that prefer to live with a family. But
facilities offering this option are few and far
between.

KEEP THIS IN MIND

With all of these facilities, always call and tour
the place before committing to anything.
Quality of homes varies greatly, as well as the
commitment of the staff members. Always
interview the group home owner to determine
whether they would be the right fit for you or

your mentally ill family member.

RESOURCES

For a list of licensed facilities, visit:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/mhlcs/facilities.html

For a list of rules and regulations, visit:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/mhlcs/rules.html

For general information, please visit:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/index.html

To email DHHR, email the following address:
dhsr.webmaster@dhhs.nc.gov
To call DHHR: (919) 855-3795

Transitions to Community Living

The Transitions to Community Living Initiative is the
result of the State of North Carolina entering into a
settlement agreement with the United States
Department of Justice (USDOJ) on August 23, 2012.
The purpose of this agreement is to assure that
persons with mental illness are allowed to reside in
their communities in the least restrictive settings of
their choice and is focused on moving individuals
out of Adult Care Homes and other institutional
settings into a community setting. The agreement is
the end product of over a year of negotiations
between the State and the USDOJ.
Learn more about the settlement and
the Transitions to Community Living Initiative.

TCLI Voucher

As part of the Transition to Community Living
Initiative across North Carolina, Alliance and the
North Carolina Housing Finance Agency administer
the Transition to Community Living Voucher. This
voucher program provides an opportunity to bring
high-quality affordable housing to qualified
individuals throughout Durham, Wake, Cumberland
and Johnston counties. The TCLV program provides
direct rent subsidy payments, Alliance staff work in
partnership with property owners throughout
tenancy to ensure success, and troubleshoot any
issue that arises.
Every individual served by Alliance with the TCL
voucher receives a normal lease like any other

8

renter in North Carolina. Along with a lease, the
individual, the property owner and Alliance enter
into an additional contract called the Owner
Contract. This contract provides additional coverage
and support to all three parties and clearly
delineates the payment structure for the voucher
program. Property owners will receive direct rental
payments from the individual equal to 20% of their
income, and Alliance pays the remainder of the Fair
Market Rent in the form of the voucher subsidy.
While this means that property owners receive two
payments each month, the Owner Contract ensures
Alliance provides direct electronic payment.
Contact: Alex Rubenstein, Housing Specialist,
(919) 651-8628

ADULT/FAMILY CARE HOMES

Another option for those with mental illness
looking for long-term housing is adult and family
care homes if individuals desire to live in an
institutional setting with services such as meals
and medication oversight. Adult and family care
homes, like the group homes already discussed,
are licensed by the North Carolina Department of
Health and Human Services.
Family care homes have two to six beds. Adult
care homes have seven or more beds.
Like the group homes, the adult and family
care homes undergo an annual survey, and
owners of homes who are breaking rules and
regulations are punished.
There are degrees of oversight, including the
DMH/DD/SAS division. The homes offer 24-hour
scheduled or unscheduled care, and require a
formal written agreement to stay in them.

FOR MENTAL HEALTH TREATMENT

While adult care homes and family care
homes don’t specifically cater to those living with
mental illness like the group homes already
mentioned, they offer an assisted living
environment. Many of those living with mental
illness in these types of facilities engage in what’s
called “wrap-around services,” which are based
upon the needs in a client’s “care plan.” While
these homes don’t function as a provider for

mental health services, they do have rules
regulating the treatment of clients who do have
mental illness. In addition, medication
dispensation has strict rules and regulations
concerning when medication is delivered, in what
dosage, and other stipulations.

RSVP Screening Prior to Admission to
Adult/Family Care Homes:
Preadmission
screening and diversion provisions as called for
inf Section III(F) of the Settlement Agreement
with the U.S. Department of Justice.
Goals of RSVP
• Determination by an independent
screener (LME-MCO or their contracted entity)
of whether the individual has SMI/SPMI.
• Determination by an independent
screener (LME-MCO or their contracted entity)
whether the individual is eligible for Medicaid
or state-funded mental health services and
supports.
Many times to get into an adult care home or
family care home, a referral is helpful. This can
come from a physician, religious organization,
social workers, or anyone else you trust.
It is good to go on the DHHS website for adult
care homes and family care homes listed here:
http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/faclistings.html

Guidelines from DHHS suggest that you ask
questions relating to available beds, type of care,
admission requirements, and what the typical
resident profile is. Visit the adult care home or
family care home and meet with the
administrator. When preparing to sign the
contract, read it all the way through.
With adult care homes and family care
homes, like most of these facilities, it really is a
process of seeking the necessary information to
find the right fit for you. Adult care homes and
family care homes offer care and support in a
group setting, and they offer the structure of
medication management, an entry assessment,
and follow-up care with providers outside of the

9

homes.
You should do your own homework by
searching the list for your local facilities, calling
them, evaluating them, and figuring out the best
one that suits your needs.
And if you move into one and don’t like it,
you can always leave. There’s a 14-day notice
that can release you of any contract you’ve
signed. You’re not stuck in a home indefinitely,
unless you want to be.
Here are the resources for adult care homes
and family care homes that you may find useful.

RESOURCES

DHSR General Information:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/index.html

Facility Listings:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/faclistings.html

Rules and Regulations:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/rules.html

Frequently Asked Questions:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/faq.html

Staff and Contacts:

http://www.ncdhhs.gov/dhsr/acls/adultcarestaff.html

DHSR Address:
805 Biggs Drive
Raleigh, North Carolina 27603
DHSR Phone #: (919) 855-3765

CARAMORE COMMUNITY

The ultimate goal at Caramore is to help people
live as whole and happy a life as possible. National
data and our experience suggests that, as it relates
to people managing SPMI, some of the biggest
hurdles include finding consistent work, safe
housing, and supportive services to assist with the
daily tasks that can be overwhelming for anyone to
face entirely on their own. Caramore accomplishes
this goal by offering Community Housing, Vocation,
Peer Support, and Supported Living.
919-967-3402, info@caramore.org
https://www.caramore.org/
Jack Simonds Center
550 Smith Level Rd.
Carrboro, NC 27510

OXFORD HOUSES

Oxford Houses are a clean and sober housing option
for individuals in recovery. North Carolina is part of
a network of 1,600 Oxford Houses with more than
13,200 beds. Individuals who are interested in living
in an Oxford House apply directly to the house of
their choice. Houses are financially self-supporting;
members split house expenses, which average
$100.00 to $150.00 per person per week.
All Oxford House vacancies, locations and contact
information in Wake County are listed on their
website at https://www.oxfordvacancies.com/ Select
"NC" (state) and "Wake" (county) to display all
current vacancies in Wake County Oxford Houses.

CONCLUSION

Finding affordable housing in Wake County can
be difficult because there just aren’t enough units
to meet the need. Because of that, most of the
public assistance programs for affordable house and
supportive housing have a large pool of applicants
and lengthy waiting lists. One of the best
resources for funding, HUD Section 8 vouchers, has
a waiting list that usually takes 4 to 7 years to
receive help. CASA has an applicant pool of 2,500
people for its 246 units of supportive housing in
Wake County. Understandably, all of this seems
daunting, but you might want to consider applying
for these programs even if they do have a long
waiting list. Even if you have moved on to other
options, when your name comes up, it may still be a
good option for you. If you no longer need it at
that time, you can decline the help.

Other Resources

Additional useful information from Resources for
Seniors
http://www.resourcesforseniors.com/pdf/directory
2019.pdf

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This housing guide would not be possible
without the help of a few select individuals. They are:
10

Alicia Arnold, Wake County Human Services
Megan Lamphere, DHHS, Division of Health Service
Regulation
Laurel J. Callis, DHHS, Division of Health Service
Regulation
Kim Westermann, CASA
We hope you received some good information
from this guide that will help you make your
decision. If you have any questions, please contact
the NAMI-Wake County office 919 848 4490.

